Predicting Heart Disease in Patients with Atypical Angina (ATA) Symptoms

Introduction

 	Heart disease is a disease that refers to several types of heart conditions, which is the main cause of death in the USA for most of racial and ethnic groups (1). The main risk factors for heart disease are high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, smoking, and age. Some of the common heart disease symptoms are chest pain, irregular heartbeats (heart beats too fast or too slow or irregularly), Pain in the back, and shortness of breath. Moreover, chest pain has different classes such as Typical Angina (TA), Atypical Angina (ATA), Non-Anginal Pain (NAP), and Asymptomatic (ASY). Atypical Angina (ATA) chest pain is any chest pain that does not meet criteria for a common or obvious diagnosis (3), and 14% of ATA chest pain leads to heart disease. 

Question 

 	Can we use the Age, resting blood pressure (normal blood pressure when body is at rest), maximum heart rate achieved, and blood cholesterol level (provided by the dataset), to predict if a patient with ATA has heart disease?
   To answer this question, we will use the “Heart Failure Prediction Dataset”. This dataset contains 11 variables, which Age, RestingBP, Cholesterol, MaxHR variables will be used to predict the heart disease status (1 = heart disease and 0 = normal). 

Methods
  In this project, we are using the “Heart Failure Prediction Dataset” and classification method to predict whether a person with atypical angina (ATA) chest pain has a heart disease or not. The classification method will be used because we want to predict heart disease status, which is a (binary) categorical variable, 1= “yes” or 0 = “no”. We will use the numerical variables (predictors) in the dataset including; age (years), resting blood pressure (mmHg), maximum heart rate, and serum cholesterol level (mm/dl) for our prediction as these numerical variables are either the risk factors or symptoms for heart disease. 
We can plot the accuracy versus number of neighbors (k-value) to find the k value with the highest accuracy using a line graph. We can also generate a scatter plot with the scaled and centered age and resting blood pressure on the axis while differentiating the heart disease status with different colors. 

Expected outcomes and significance:
By developing this model, we expect to be able to predict heart disease accurately based on the biological determinants observed in individuals. This model is particularly significant as it filters for the individuals with ATA chest pain. Chest pain with an atypical angina is not easily diagnosed or classified as a common or obvious condition. Therefore, our model can lay the groundwork for development of models that predict or diagnose heart disease in the patients with atypical pains. Also, in our analysis, some relationships may be observed between heart disease and the predictors. These observations can lead the researchers to answer further questions like what the physiological mechanisms behind these relationships are. Another significant question that will expand this work would be how we can design one model capable of predicting heart disease in individuals with different types of chest pains and across different genders.



